From New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro. This [music] is The Daily.
In ways big and small, the
Republican-controlled [music]
Congress has begun rebelling against
President Trump as never before. On
everything from the war in Iran to his
plan to use [music] taxpayer money to
pay his allies.
Today,
congressional editor Julie Davis [music]
on whether the uprising is a preview of
a new dynamic in Washington or a
temporary show of independence
>> [music]
>> that will vanish just as quickly as it
arrived.
It's
>> [music]
>> Monday, June 8th.
Julie, it's wonderful to see you.
>> Great to see you, Michael.
>> Thank you for coming on the show. I
appreciate it.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> I would say, Julie, I don't think you're
going to contest this, that from the
first moment of Trump's second term,
the question on kind of everyone's mind
was whether the manner in which the
president had consolidated his power had
basically rendered this Congress, this
Republican Congress, irrelevant. Right?
I mean, it very much looked like a
co-equal branch of government was
choosing subservience very willingly.
And we started to ask the question, is
Congress over?
And the answer over the past 10 days or
so
seemed to change. And now it feels more
like a no, it's not over.
>> Yeah, I mean, I I think in the first
months of President Trump's second term,
we were actually surprised on the hill
to see the degree to which Republicans
were just deferring to him on
everything, not just refusing to
challenge him on things, but actively
kind of giving back their power on some
pretty key things on spending, on trade
and tariffs, on foreign policy, things
that you typically see Congress
jealously guarding as its own
prerogatives, finding every possible way
to give it over to the White House, and
really even just avoiding voting on
things all together.
>> Right. It was literally like a kid in
the playground saying, "Take this toy.
Take this toy. Take this shovel. Take
this truck."
>> Right. That was really all we were
seeing from Republicans when it came to
President Trump. But, in the last few
weeks, we have seen
some pretty rare and unusual resistance
coming from Republicans. They're
refusing to act on legislation that's a
big priority for him, refusing to move
on the timelines that he set out for
them. They're stripping things from
legislation and forcing the
administration to drop proposals that
they don't like.
>> Mhm.
>> And, in the case of the war in Iran,
they're actually
using their power to push back on
President Trump.
>> They're basically rebelling.
>> They're rebelling. To go back to your
playground metaphor, Michael, it's a
little bit like a group of kids who have
obeyed their daddy for many, many months
on pretty much everything,
and are finally just saying, "No, Daddy,
we're not going to do this for you."
>> Mhm. That's quite a vivid completion of
the metaphor. So, take us behind the
scenes of this rebellion, if that's what
we're going to be calling it, and we'll
get to how durable it is and how far it
may or may not go, but let's just
understand it to the extent that it has
been unfolding.
On the surface, a lot of it seemed to
revolve around the weaponization fund,
the president's nearly $2 billion
effort to compensate people he claims
are victims of
overzealous government prosecution, but
my sense is that that's not quite the
full story.
>> [snorts]
>> Yeah, it actually started long before
the Trump administration announced that
they were creating that fund. This has
been percolating for many weeks, and
it's really, I think, a matter of
Republicans sort of slowly and then very
quickly waking up to the reality that a
lot of what President Trump is doing is
actually counter to their own political
interests. Let's remember that we are
just months away from the midterm
elections, and Trump is intervening in
Republican primaries against some pretty
popular members of their caucus who are
incumbents who are fighting for their
political lives.
>> Mhm.
>> He intervenes in Louisiana, endorses a
Republican congresswoman who's running
against Bill Cassidy, the senator who's
the head of the health committee,
>> Right.
>> who has spent years in trying to
ingratiate himself with Trump after
having voted to convict him at his
impeachment trial after January 6th.
But Trump ultimately decided he wanted
to take him out.
>> And did.
>> And he did. And he did. But the second
Senate primary where President Trump
intervened, and I think the more
stinging one that made Republicans a lot
angrier, was in Texas.
Where Senator John Cornyn had been
facing a challenge from Ken Paxton, the
attorney general. They're in a runoff.
It was going to be a competitive one.
President Trump had stayed neutral, and
days before
the primary, he weighs in and endorses
Ken Paxton. And that news that the
president was going to do that just
hit Republicans on the Hill like a bomb.
They were completely irate, in part
because Cornyn was seen as the much
stronger candidate
>> Mhm.
>> who would be able to win that seat
without having to spend a lot of money,
without having to really worry about it
because there are obviously a lot of
other seats that they need to be
worrying about defending in the midterm
year. So, that just soured the mood
among Republicans who are sort of
looking around,
>> [music]
>> seeing that President Trump's agenda is
getting less and less popular with
voters, seeing that he's doing things
really they feel like are for himself
and not for the good of the party.
>> [music]
>> You know, Republicans are fighting to
hold on to majorities in both chambers
and they have an uphill battle and there
started to be a real feeling like he was
making it harder for [music] them.
>> Mhm.
>> And I should say that both of these
senators are very popular with their
Republican colleagues. They're seen as
effective,
>> [music]
>> they're seen as experienced and they
know how to do their jobs. And the very
same day that Trump came out and
endorsed Paxton against Cornyn, in the
weekly party lunch,
>> [music]
>> Bill Cassidy, returning for the first
time since being defeated in his
primary, got a standing ovation from
Republicans. It was kind of like a
moment where they sort of were saying,
"You're our guy, even if you're not
President Trump's."
>> Clearly what's starting to dawn on these
Republicans is that Trump is making the
midterms about him, making it about
revenge, not at all what's best for a
party trying to keep control of
Congress.
And on top of all this, what Trump is
clearly doing in the eyes of these
Republicans is rewarding their
subservience. I mean, Cornyn votes with
Trump 90-something percent of the time,
same with Cassidy.
Rewarding that with
them being punished and forced out of
office. So, why should they keep being
subservient starts to basically be the
question.
>> Right, that is the question and this is
the context in which the administration
announces without any advanced word to
any Republican on Capitol Hill
that they will be forming this
anti-weaponization
fund of 1.776
billion dollars to the administration
says compensate
people who have been victimized by the
federal government and clear implication
that this is for people loyal to
President Trump including potentially
the mobs that stormed the Capitol on
January 6th who he feels have been
wronged by the government and unfairly
targeted and so he would like to use
federal money to pay these people and
this just sort of in the context of all
of this tension
>> Mhm.
>> that Republicans are feeling toward the
president and how he's making his
decisions just hits them like a ton of
bricks.
>> My first reaction was this doesn't pass
the smell test. This might be one area
where you might find a lot of bipartisan
questioning of whether or not this is a
good idea.
>> This is another instance of him going
around Congress to use money in the way
that he sees fit.
>> There are a lot of questions that the
administration is going to have to
answer.
>> These people don't deserve restitution.
Many of them deserve to be in prison. I
mean this is just stupid on stilts.
>> And let's not forget Republicans worked
to acquit him at his impeachment trial.
They have been loyal to him for years
since January 6th but they were all in
the Capitol on January 6th when people
assaulted the building and they were all
running for their lives. So they're all
it's sort of dawning on them both
personally and frankly politically.
They're going to have to defend this in
front of voters at a time when they are
many of them are running for
re-election. This is really not a good
look and this is not something that they
want to have to stand behind.
>> It's as if somebody sued themselves
agreed upon a settlement with themselves
and that's going to be funded by the
rest of us.
I can tell you the voter don't like
that. Or if they like it, maybe they're
in on it.
>> And this is not just an academic
exercise for them because what they also
realize is
that President Trump has set them one of
his famous deadlines, a June 1st
deadline, for them to deliver him the
huge $70 immigration enforcement bill
that he's been asking for for months.
And they are trying to move on to that
bill and they start to realize because
they have so many concerns about this
fund and there's so much sentiment among
Republicans to try to do something to
shut this idea down that they're
probably not going to be able to get the
votes to move forward with the
immigration bill
unless they do something
to either get President Trump to reverse
himself on the fund or actually
affirmatively write some legislation to
block him from doing it.
>> So at the same time that the president
is putting forth this toxic idea of a
weaponization fund that might give money
to January 6th rioters
he's saying to these Senate Republicans,
"Pass this gargantuan spending bill I
want even though I'm putting you in a
tough position all around."
>> Right. And Republicans initially are
trying to figure out if there's a way
they can do this. Todd Blanche, the
acting attorney general, comes to the
Hill to try to assuage their concerns
about the fund. He meets with them
behind closed doors.
>> What do you want to hear from Todd
Blanche?
>> Uh about the payout pot for punks?
Uh not a lot.
>> And it is just a complete blow up.
>> It's one of the roughest meetings I've
seen in my entire time in the Senate.
Fiery does not begin to cut it.
>> It very quickly becomes clear that this
is a complete non-starter for
Republicans. They call off their vote on
this bill. They leave for Memorial Day
weekend and say
the way things stand now, we just we
can't move forward.
>> And calling off a vote sounds to the lay
ear like a subtle act of recalcitrance,
but
in the moment, it felt very much like a
declaration of independence. We are
canceling a vote to put $70
into immigration enforcement for the
president, his signature agenda.
>> Right. And remember that when the
president sets them a deadline or asks
them to do something in the past,
Republicans have always just snapped
right to and done it. So, the fact that
they're willing
and really feel like they have to go
home and not do this, it does feel like
a real pivot point. We have not seen
them push back on the president or his
legislative agenda in this way before.
>> So, any questions, please?
>> And a couple hours later in the Oval
Office, President Trump is making an
appearance and reporters actually ask
him like
>> Are you losing control of the Senate,
Senate Republicans?
>> Are you losing your hold on the Senate?
>> I don't know. I really don't know. I can
tell you I only do what's right.
>> And Trump says, "Well, I'm not really
sure. I don't know." But all around him,
there is mounting evidence that he is
really not keeping Republicans online in
line on a variety of his priorities.
It's right around this time that
Republicans decide to drop the billion
dollars that they had put in their bill
for his ballroom project. We all know
how much he cherishes that project. He
talks about it all the time. While
Republicans wish that he would talk
about the economy, he's always talking
about the ballroom project.
>> Right.
>> They drop that. It's a not-so-subtle
brush-off to him.
>> Right. They basically say despite your
desire that we slip it quietly into a
bill, we're actually going to take it
out.
>> Right. They don't want to have to defend
it. They don't want to have to vote for
it. And they really are not letting up
this payout fund. They make it very
clear that this thing has to die if
they're going to be able to move forward
with the immigration bill.
>> And it's sort of by coincidence around
this moment as I recall that a court
rules that the White House can't do
anything when it comes to this
weaponization fund which kind of assists
these congressional Republicans in their
opposition.
>> Right, it gives them a bit of support
for their position that the
administration just has to abandon this.
Although the court order is only
temporary, so it also strengthens their
resolve to really be like something
needs to be done about this to once and
for all get it off the table. And in
fact, within a couple of days, the
administration does back down on the
fund. The Justice Department puts out
word that they're not going to challenge
this court ruling. And in this case, it
was especially notable because even
after the White House said they were
going to abide by this court order,
which they clearly did not agree with,
Republicans went a step further and
said, "We don't trust you. We don't
trust the word of the White House. We
don't trust the Justice Department
saying they're going to abide by this.
We want an on-the-record disavowal of
this thing and to be assured that it
will never return." And that is just not
something we have seen Republicans do.
They, you know, have been very
deferential and given President Trump a
lot of latitude and a lot of benefit of
the doubt, and that benefit of the doubt
is just gone at this point. And then,
Todd Blanche goes back to Capitol Hill
and testifies under oath that we are not
moving forward with this fund, period.
>> Right. And I think it's fair to say, if
you're evaluating the strength of this
Republican rebellion at its peak over
the past couple of weeks, this is the
high-water mark of it. When
congressional Republicans, using the
leverage they have over something that
the president wants, which is his money
for the immigration crackdown,
kill off this weaponization fund.
>> Right. This is Republicans doing what
Democrats have been saying for more than
a year they needed to do, which is use
their power, use their leverage to push
back on the president at a moment of,
you know, pretty potent anger among
Republicans about some of the things the
president has done.
>> And of course that anger and this
rebellion we're talking about it doesn't
end with the weaponization fund because
another big target emerges around this
same time and that is the president's
war in Iran. And we'll talk about that
right after the break.
We'll be right back.
So Julie, explain how this Republican
pushback in Congress that we most
vividly saw against the weaponization
fund starts to play out with the war in
Iran.
>> So for months now, since President Trump
started bombing Iran in late February,
Democrats have been forcing these war
powers votes on the House and Senate
floors, which are essentially
resolutions that say the president has
to come to Congress for authorization if
he wants to continue the war.
>> Mhm.
>> And they're important not so much
because anyone really thinks that
they're going to be enacted into law.
Obviously, President Trump has said
these are unconstitutional. He'd veto
any resolution like this that ever
reached his desk. But Democrats and some
Republicans who are growing increasingly
uneasy with how this is dragging on see
it as a way of really registering
Congress's skepticism about this and
really trying to reassert a
congressional role in matters of war,
which again is one of these things that
Republicans have for months just seated
to the president and not attempted to
involve themselves in. And every time
one of these comes up, the Republican
leadership argues this is going to tie
the president's hands, this is going to
undermine his ability to negotiate. We
can't be doing this right now. Congress
just needs to step back. So Republicans
keep voting against it with a few
defections, but not enough to actually
let this pass
until this sort of rebellion starts to
bubble up within the party about a range
of issues.
And all of a sudden, a few days after
Bill Cassidy loses his primary, there's
yet another War Powers vote in the
Senate.
>> We are following some breaking news in
Washington where the US Senate just
passed legislation
>> And guess who switches his vote and
votes with Democrats to insist that
Trump come to Congress for
authorization.
>> Mr. Cassidy, Mr. Cassidy, I
>> Bill Cassidy.
>> I actually support the goals that the
president initially laid out.
And it was going to be 2 weeks. Well,
obviously going longer than 2 weeks. So
just
tell the American people that's where we
are on this.
>> What does the fact
>> And that is enough to put the resolution
over the top and the Senate now has to
take it up and has to eventually vote on
it. So it's just another indication that
dissent is growing about this conflict
that a lot of Democrats and certainly
many Republicans see as a political
liability for them.
And they don't feel like the White House
or the president has leveled with them
on what the goals are, what the end game
is. And all of a sudden some of these
reservations, which we've heard
Republicans kind of allude to gently for
many months,
are manifesting themselves in
>> [music]
>> a vote, which is a pretty remarkable
moment.
And then before too long
>> Members will record their votes by
electronic device. Members, this is a
5-minute vote.
>> A war powers resolution comes up in the
House, which [music] is a much more
conservative body, where the leaders
have a much tighter rein on their
people.
But still
>> Vote. The yeas are 215 and the nays are
208.
The concurrent resolution is adopted.
>> Enough Republicans defect and join
Democrats to pass the resolution.
>> Congress alone declares war. That's
something that we have to be, you know,
certainly protective of.
>> And essentially say
Trump has to withdraw forces or come to
Congress for authorization.
>> We have to follow the law. There's a law
on the books, the War Powers Act of '73,
so you can't violate the law. That's not
an option.
>> [music]
>> And the key crossover votes came from
Republicans who are in competitive
districts.
>> [music]
>> There are a a variety of considerations
that we have to take into account, but I
definitely feel what people are
experiencing back home. You know, I go
back home to my district every single
week. You know, I fill up my gas tank,
too. I I have four kids. [music] We're
taking
>> They're concerned about the war. It's
gone on too long. It's costing too much.
They want to see an end [music] game.
>> Interesting. So, swing district
Republicans
are crossing over, voting with Democrats
to register their disapproval of the war
because they worry that the war, the
resulting high gas prices are going to
cost them re-election. This goes back to
what you were saying earlier that at the
heart of this Republican rebellion is
this very strong sense that the
president is not looking out for the
best interests of the Republican Party.
>> Right. This is a president who has said
in recent weeks that he doesn't care
about the financial impact on Americans
when he's thinking about the war. He
doesn't care about the midterms, and
Republicans are starting to look around
and say like, well, where does that
leave us?
And by this point, we're starting to see
some interesting coalitions form here to
really be the spine of this pushback
against Trump. You have
swing district Republicans like Senator
Susan Collins was among the senators who
voted for the War Powers Resolution in
the Senate. Brian Fitzpatrick, Tom
Barrett of Michigan were the ones in the
house.
>> Purple state lawmakers.
>> Right. But, you also have this other
faction, you know, who are starting to
get the nickname of the Yolo
>> Caucus.
>> have been targeted by the president.
They've been ousted and are lame ducks.
And they don't have a reason anymore to
be unbendingly loyal to Donald Trump.
Bill Cassidy already lost his
reelection. John Cornyn lost his
reelection. Tom Massie was another
Republican who voted for the War Powers
Act in the house, lost his primary to a
Trump-backed challenger just a few weeks
ago. So,
they're sort of conspiring with these
people who have everything to lose
politically. They have nothing to lose
politically.
But, the result is the same that they
are willing to push back on a president
who is not used to being resisted.
>> Right. And of course, the thing to note
about the so-called Yolo Coalition is
they might not have anything left to
lose, but they're not going to be in
their jobs much longer. They can fight
the president until their term is up at
the end of the year, and then
inevitably, they're being replaced by
people who are very loyal to the
president.
Potentially someone like Ken Paxton if
he wins the general election, and
therefore, the threat that they pose to
the president is inherently temporary,
or saying.
>> Absolutely. And it's not clear how far
any of them are willing to go with this,
right? We saw Senator Cassidy vote for
the War Powers Act. We didn't see John
Cornyn cross party lines on that. He's a
very loyal Republican, and we have yet
to see him really manifest his, you you
grievance if he feels any toward the
president in a vote, but the fact
remains that their political incentive
to do whatever the president wants them
to do has vastly diminished.
>> Well, I think Julie that gets at the
ultimate question that we have to ask
here, which is how durable and potent is
this resistance likely to be in the long
term? Obviously, a unique set of
circumstances
played out here all at once, where the
president ousted popular members of the
Republican Party from their jobs. That
made folks really angry. Then he dropped
this idea of the weaponization fund into
everyone's laps. That made them angry.
That doesn't happen every day. And how
likely are these congressional
Republicans over time to snap back into
this more subservient role that Trump
has conditioned them to take?
>> Right. It's It's a great question. It's
the question to ask. And it's
instructive to look at what happened
Thursday and Friday, where Republicans
finally were able
to pass their immigration bill. And
what we see is that given the
opportunity by Democrats to
go a step further and actually put it in
writing in law that there can never be
President Trump's compensation fund for
his political allies,
Republicans figure out a way to block
that, not to vote for that. And that
allows them to keep this immigration
bill, this top priority of President
Trump, on track.
But even
as they're handing him this big victory,
there were all these signs still of how
Republicans were sort of parting ways
with and finding ways to distance
themselves from Trump. Before the
immigration bill passed, there was this
long series of votes overnight and into
Friday morning, they call it a
vot-a-rama where there were a series of
amendments offered to the bill and there
were some Republican votes for those
proposals.
>> Mhm.
>> Including several votes on the fund and
a proposal to say that Trump could never
use any federal money for his ballroom.
The same was true on a Democratic
proposal to try to block him from naming
Bill Pulte the housing director as the
director of national intelligence.
Another thing that had really enraged a
lot of Republicans.
None of these things ultimately were
able to succeed and be added to the
bill, but the fact that Republicans were
willing to vote the way they did
showed that there is at least some mood
in their ranks which hasn't really
existed before to resist what the
president is demanding of them.
>> Right.
>> And I think that's kind of where we're
seeing them land. They're not going to
be willing to derail their own party's
agenda
in the service of defying Trump, right?
They still want to keep their
immigration bill and their message to
voters on track because in the end what
this really is about is them trying to
do what they think is best for
themselves and the party.
And their agendas overlap with his in
many ways, in most ways. But where there
is some daylight
and the president [music] keeps on
creating this daylight
closer and closer we [music] get to
November
they're going to push back and rebel.
And that marks [music] a new chapter in
the story of this president and the
Republican Congress.
>> Well, Julie, thank you very much. As
always, appreciate your time.
>> [music]
>> Thank you, Michael. Same here.
>> In an interview [music] on Sunday with
NBC's Meet the Press
President Trump acknowledged the
bipartisan opposition that killed his
so-called weaponization fund.
>> It's been blocked by the courts, met
with opposition from Republicans
>> and Democrats
>> in Congress and Democrats
>> me. Mostly Democrats.
>> Mostly Democrats and some Republicans.
>> Some. Very few Republicans.
>> Just
>> but said he still supported the idea
[music] in theory.
>> Well, it's look, if it was up to me,
I'd pay them the kind of money that they
deserve. [music]
People have been destroyed. Lives have
been destroyed.
>> During the interview, Trump also sought
to downplay [music]
the war in Iran and the growing doubts
that surrounded it.
>> I call it a military exercise cuz people
would rather have it called that. It's
not a big war for us. It's not We're the
most powerful
>> The latest version of the War Powers
Resolution against the war, already
passed [music] in the House,
now heads to the Senate.
Under congressional rules, the Senate
must either pass or reject the
resolution
>> [music]
>> in the next few weeks.
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
[music]
On Sunday, Iran fired ballistic missiles
toward Israel, the first time Iran has
done so since a ceasefire [music] began
in early April.
Sunday's attack was in response to a
deadly Israeli airstrike [music] in
Lebanon that targeted Hezbollah, a
militant group backed by [music] Iran.
Israel said it intercepted all the
Iranian missiles and a few hours later,
it [music] fired back at Iran.
The back-and-forth threatens to escalate
a conflict that has been largely
contained and further complicates peace
talks [music] between the United States
and Iran that have sputtered for weeks.
Today's episode [music] was produced by
Chris Bender
Mary Wilson Anna Foley and Olivia Nat.
It was [music] edited by Rachel Quester
and Rob Zipko and contains music by Pat
McCusker Dan [music] Powell Alicia Betub
and Marion Lozano.
Our theme music is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Chris
[music] Wood.
>> [music]
>> That's it for the daily.
I'm Michael Barbaro.
See you tomorrow.